[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> New studies show
unprecedented success
in the treatment of alcoholism
with psychedelic therapy.
>> This is a massive
breakthrough for such a huge
public health problem.
>> This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The psychedelic revolution
in mental health
has produced overwhelming
scientific evidence,
demonstrating the great
efficacy of psychedelics
and the treatment of various
mental health disorders.
Now, several new studies
involving the drugs ketamine
and MDMA are showing
significant promise
in the treatment of alcoholism.
Dr. Ben Sessa is a psychiatrist
and chief medical officer
at Awakn Life Sciences, a
British biotech company that
is at the forefront of research,
development, and delivery
of psychedelic medicines.
The company is
especially focused
on the treatment of alcohol
use disorder or AUD,
given how prevalent and
challenging it is to treat.
>> Addiction is a huge
public health problem.
It's also a
psychiatric condition
that's very poorly treated
with very poor outcomes
with traditional methods.
Relapse to drinking
after getting dry
is around 80% to
90% at 12 months.
That's an embarrassingly
poor statistic.
Psychedelics offer a
completely new approach.
They offer the patient
the opportunity
to explore the root
causes of addiction,
which so often is trauma.
Psychedelic-assisted
psychotherapy
is an intensive
upfront piece of work
that gets the patient
better so they
don't have to keep coming back.
And this is a completely
different paradigm shift
to the way we currently
manage patients
in maintenance therapies.
>> A recent study conducted by
researchers at the University
of Exeter and Awakn Life
Sciences is the world's first
to examine the use of ketamine
to treat AUD in a randomized
controlled trial.
>> Ketamine is a very
well-established human
medicine.
It is one of-- it is,
indeed, the only psychedelic
that's licensed as a medicine,
as an anesthetic medicine,
and has been used
since the '60s as such.
It's an incredibly
safe medicine.
When it's used at
a much lower dose,
it produces an altered
state of consciousness.
And what we do in
psychedelic-assisted
psychotherapy with ketamine
is we use this altered state
of consciousness to affect
more effective and deeper form
of psychotherapy.
So we're using
ketamine as an adjunct
to psychotherapy to
treat addictions.
>> Participants in the
study had all just completed
a medically-supervised
alcohol detox program.
Those in the experimental
group received treatment
with both ketamine and
a form of psychotherapy
called care over the
course of four weeks.
The results were astounding.
>> The group that received
ketamine and specific care
psychotherapy led to an 86%
abstinence rate at six months.
Absolutely, blows
out of the water
the current best
treatments for alcoholism.
>> Just what accounts for
these astounding results?
>> So we know a fair bit about
the mode of action of ketamine.
You literally grow new brain
tissue after taking ketamine.
Now this is hugely
helpful because when
you combine that-- if you think
of it as a sort of super, ripe,
brain bristling with
new neuronal activity
and you combine that with
psychotherapy in which you are
asking the patient to address
the psychological issues,
usually around stuck,
rigid narratives they hold,
then you can grow this new
neural tissue in the direction
you want to have changes
to their psychology.
And this is a huge
breakthrough for addictions,
which are so much about
rigidity and stuckness.
>> The implications of this
groundbreaking study are truly
profound.
>> Once we get the drug
actually licensed and approved
for, specifically,
alcohol use disorder,
it hugely broadens the
accessibility and far more
clinicians would be willing to
be using this in a much broader
way.
So it will really
radically change
the field of treatment of
alcoholism all over the world.
>> In addition to their
work with ketamine,
Awakn has also recently
completed a study with another
psychoactive drug, MDMA, which
has yielded equally significant
findings.
For more on this, check out
part two of this Gaia News
special investigation.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]